A summed probability distribution (spd) is a category of temporal frequency distribution (tfd), a sample distribution generated from an underlying temporal frequency distribution (TFD, capitalized as a convention to distinguish between the population/probability distribution - the TFD - and its sample expression - the tfd). On one hand, using spds as estimators of their underlying TFDs is regarded as best practice insofar as spds uniquely incorporate information about both the probabilistic nature of radiometric age estimates and the nonlinear relationship existing between radiocarbon and calendric ages. On the other hand, it is naive to think that the resemblance between a TFD and its spd expression is perfect. The data generating process (DGP) informing the production of any given spd includes (1) drawing a random sample of i.i.d. calendric ages from the underlying TFD, (2) the stochastic transformation of these calendric ages into true radiocarbon ages, (3) additional stochastic offset of these ages resulting from instrument measurement, and (4) the computationally complex, nonlinear transformation of probabilistic radiocarbon age estimates into probabilistic calendric age estimates. In effect, these factors constitute sources of error - the first three entailing noise and the last interference - that collectively undermine the validity of employing spds as reliable estimators of TFDs.

The R code provided here allows for the iterated simulation of spds from specified TFDs, incorporating the complex of DGPs mentioned above. The iterated nature of this simulation allows it to be employed in a Monte Carlo simulation framework: First, it allows for the experimental manipulation of several parameters of interest in the DGP: TFD scale, shape, and location; per-run sample size; degree of instrument measurement error; and choice of calibration curve used first for translating calendric into true radiocarbon ages, then for translating probabilistic radiocarbon age estimates back into probabilistic calendric age estimates. And second, it allows plug-in estimators to be calculated based on inter-run comparison, allowing the researcher to assess the character  of influence that the various sources of error listed above have on spd-TFD disparity.

An implementation of this framework, focused on a case study drawn from the archaeological literature and featured in a submitted manuscript to the Journal of Archaeological Science by me (William Brown) in August 2014, is also provided.

Future modifications to the framework will allow for the exploration of two additional sources of error: (1) stochastic fluctuations in counted-unit deposition (a Poisson process), as well as systemic changes in the average unit deposition rate per person year; and (2) probabilistic site survival, whether assuming a time-invariant survival function (e.g., as suggested by Surovell and colleagues' 2013 article) or cohort-dependent survival models.
